The Italian Parliament is made by two chambers and 605 members, among which we count deputies and senators. Italian voters choose them through elections, nominally every 5 years.

This process happens because Italy is a republic with a so-called _representative democracy_, which means that citizens elect people that can represent themselves in an assembly, which in the case of Italy is called Parliament.

The representation issue may seem trivial, but it's instead a subtle issue to address. In fact, Hanna Pitkin's influential work[REF] led to the identification of four views of representation: formalistic, symbolic, descriptive and substantive. The _formalistic representation_ is the one estabilished by the institutional mechanism, basing on authorization and accountability. The _symbolic representation_ pertains the meanining and significance that representatives hold for their constituents. Its legitimacy is based on the recognition by the constituents. The _descriptive representation_ lies on the idea that sharing demographic characteristics can lead to better understanding and advocacy for specific groups' interests. The _substantive representation_ focuses on the actions taken by representatives on behalf of their consituents, emphasizing on the outcomes of representation over mere resemblance or formal processes. 

Currently, in Italy the first two views are fairly present, although disillusionment towards politics is growing, as evidenced by the fact that more and more citizens are deserting the ballot box during elections (during 2022 elections, just 64% of the citizens voted). How are the other two kinds of representation doing? The substantive representation certainly is essential, since has its core on practical results, the representatives' acts in the interests of the represented (new laws and financing). Is this related to the descriptive representation? Pitkin herself is skeptical: just looking like the group does not garantee acting in its interests. [We will see later in the discussion some examples that support this view.] Vice versa, a person can advocate for another even if they do not belong to the same demographic group. For instance, in 1978 an Italian Parliament with less than 7% of women, passed a fundamental law on abortion. The thing is, we do not know if a major presence of women would have lead to have it way before 1978 (later than most of European countries). Several political scientists[REF] argue that _presence_ matters in deliberative settings because it affects what gets discussed and how perspectives are received. 

Yet, entire portions of the population are not properly represented in the Italian Parliament in terms of a descriptive view. Very often this means that they do not have a voice, and this could also lead them to lower their level of recognition and sense of legitimacy, mining so the symbolic representation. 

Italian Parliament should urge to fill the gap between it and the actual Italian society.